p8105_hw2_fl2715
================
Fengwei Lei

## Load Necessary Library

``` r
library(tidyverse)
```

    ## ── Attaching core tidyverse packages ──────────────────────── tidyverse 2.0.0 ──
    ## ✔ dplyr     1.1.4     ✔ readr     2.1.5
    ## ✔ forcats   1.0.0     ✔ stringr   1.5.1
    ## ✔ ggplot2   3.5.1     ✔ tibble    3.2.1
    ## ✔ lubridate 1.9.3     ✔ tidyr     1.3.1
    ## ✔ purrr     1.0.2     
    ## ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
    ## ✖ dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
    ## ✖ dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()
    ## ℹ Use the conflicted package (<http://conflicted.r-lib.org/>) to force all conflicts to become errors

``` r
library(readxl)
```

## Problem 1

``` r
nyc_df=
  read_csv(
    "./NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv",
    na = c("NA", ".", "")) |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  select(
    line, station_name, station_latitude, station_longitude, 
    starts_with("route"), entry, exit_only, vending, entrance_type, 
    ada) |> 
  mutate(entry = ifelse(entry == "YES", TRUE, FALSE))
```

    ## Rows: 1868 Columns: 32
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (22): Division, Line, Station Name, Route1, Route2, Route3, Route4, Rout...
    ## dbl  (8): Station Latitude, Station Longitude, Route8, Route9, Route10, Rout...
    ## lgl  (2): ADA, Free Crossover
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

The above dataset contains information from
`NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv`. It includes variables
such as subway line, station name, latitude, longitude, routes served,
entry status, exit-only status, vending availability, entrance type, and
ADA compliance. Data cleaning steps involved handling missing values,
cleaning column names, selecting relevant variables, and converting the
entry variable from “YES”/“NO” to a logical format (TRUE/FALSE). The
resulting dataset has 1868 rows and 20 columns.

But these data is not fully “tidy”: both the route number and route
should be treated as variables. To make the dataset tidy, we need to
reshape the route variables from wide to long format. This restructuring
is helpful when analyzing specific routes.

The below code shows that the number of distinct stations identified
both by name and line, where we use the `distinct()` fuction.

``` r
nyc_df |> 
  select(station_name, line) |> 
  distinct()
```

    ## # A tibble: 465 × 2
    ##    station_name             line    
    ##    <chr>                    <chr>   
    ##  1 25th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  2 36th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  3 45th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  4 53rd St                  4 Avenue
    ##  5 59th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  6 77th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  7 86th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  8 95th St                  4 Avenue
    ##  9 9th St                   4 Avenue
    ## 10 Atlantic Av-Barclays Ctr 4 Avenue
    ## # ℹ 455 more rows

The following code chunk illustrates the number of stations which are
ADA compliant. Firstly, we filter the rows where `ada == TRUE`. And we
do the similar steps to the above code chunk.

``` r
nyc_df |> 
  filter(ada == TRUE) |> 
  select(station_name, line) |> 
  distinct()
```

    ## # A tibble: 84 × 2
    ##    station_name                   line           
    ##    <chr>                          <chr>          
    ##  1 Atlantic Av-Barclays Ctr       4 Avenue       
    ##  2 DeKalb Av                      4 Avenue       
    ##  3 Pacific St                     4 Avenue       
    ##  4 Grand Central                  42nd St Shuttle
    ##  5 34th St                        6 Avenue       
    ##  6 47-50th Sts Rockefeller Center 6 Avenue       
    ##  7 Church Av                      6 Avenue       
    ##  8 21st St                        63rd Street    
    ##  9 Lexington Av                   63rd Street    
    ## 10 Roosevelt Island               63rd Street    
    ## # ℹ 74 more rows

The following code chunk shows the proportion of station entrances /
exits without vending allow entrance. We firstly filter the rows where
there is no vending. And since the variable `entry` is a logical
variable, we could compute the mean for calculating proportion.

``` r
nyc_df |> 
  filter(vending == "NO") |> 
  pull(entry) |> 
  mean()
```

    ## [1] 0.3770492

Finally, we compute the number of distinct stations that serve the A
train, and that are ADA compliant. To reformat the data successfully, we
firstly convert the variables `route8`, `route9`, `route10` and
`route11` into character type, since they were double type before. After
that, we tidy the data with converting `route` from wide to long format.
And then, we use `filter()`, `select()`, `distinct()` function to find
the regarding results (similar to the above steps).

``` r
nyc_df=
  nyc_df |> 
  mutate(
    route8=as.character(route8),
    route9=as.character(route9),
    route10=as.character(route10),
    route11=as.character(route11))

nyc_df |> 
  pivot_longer(
    route1:route11,
    names_to = "route_num",
    values_to = "route") |> 
  filter(route == "A") |> 
  select(station_name, line) |> 
  distinct()
```

    ## # A tibble: 60 × 2
    ##    station_name                  line           
    ##    <chr>                         <chr>          
    ##  1 Times Square                  42nd St Shuttle
    ##  2 125th St                      8 Avenue       
    ##  3 145th St                      8 Avenue       
    ##  4 14th St                       8 Avenue       
    ##  5 168th St - Washington Heights 8 Avenue       
    ##  6 175th St                      8 Avenue       
    ##  7 181st St                      8 Avenue       
    ##  8 190th St                      8 Avenue       
    ##  9 34th St                       8 Avenue       
    ## 10 42nd St                       8 Avenue       
    ## # ℹ 50 more rows

``` r
nyc_df |> 
  pivot_longer(
    route1:route11,
    names_to = "route_num",
    values_to = "route") |> 
  filter(route == "A", ada == TRUE) |> 
  select(station_name, line) |> 
  distinct()
```

    ## # A tibble: 17 × 2
    ##    station_name                  line            
    ##    <chr>                         <chr>           
    ##  1 14th St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  2 168th St - Washington Heights 8 Avenue        
    ##  3 175th St                      8 Avenue        
    ##  4 34th St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  5 42nd St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  6 59th St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  7 Inwood - 207th St             8 Avenue        
    ##  8 West 4th St                   8 Avenue        
    ##  9 World Trade Center            8 Avenue        
    ## 10 Times Square-42nd St          Broadway        
    ## 11 59th St-Columbus Circle       Broadway-7th Ave
    ## 12 Times Square                  Broadway-7th Ave
    ## 13 8th Av                        Canarsie        
    ## 14 Franklin Av                   Franklin        
    ## 15 Euclid Av                     Fulton          
    ## 16 Franklin Av                   Fulton          
    ## 17 Howard Beach                  Rockaway

From the above reformat data, we can see that there are **60** distinct
stations serve the A train. And **17** Of the stations that serve the A
train and are ADA compliant.

## Problem 2

### Read and Clean Mr. Trash Wheel Data

The following code block reads the Mr. Trash Wheel sheet from the Excel
file, starting from the second row to skip the header. We use
`janitor::clean_names()` to clean the column names. Then, we apply
`filter()` to remove rows with missing values in the dumpster column,
retaining only those that contain specific dumpster data. Next, we use
`mutate()` to round the values in the sports_balls column to the nearest
integer and convert them to integer type while adding a source column to
indicate that the data comes from “Mr.”

``` r
mr_trash_wheel=
  read_excel(
    "./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx",
    sheet="Mr. Trash Wheel",
    range="A2:N655") |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) |> 
  mutate(
    sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls)),
    source="Mr"
  )

mr_trash_wheel
```

    ## # A tibble: 651 × 15
    ##    dumpster month year  date                weight_tons volume_cubic_yards
    ##       <dbl> <chr> <chr> <dttm>                    <dbl>              <dbl>
    ##  1        1 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        4.31                 18
    ##  2        2 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        2.74                 13
    ##  3        3 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        3.45                 15
    ##  4        4 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        3.1                  15
    ##  5        5 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        4.06                 18
    ##  6        6 May   2014  2014-05-20 00:00:00        2.71                 13
    ##  7        7 May   2014  2014-05-21 00:00:00        1.91                  8
    ##  8        8 May   2014  2014-05-28 00:00:00        3.7                  16
    ##  9        9 June  2014  2014-06-05 00:00:00        2.52                 14
    ## 10       10 June  2014  2014-06-11 00:00:00        3.76                 18
    ## # ℹ 641 more rows
    ## # ℹ 9 more variables: plastic_bottles <dbl>, polystyrene <dbl>,
    ## #   cigarette_butts <dbl>, glass_bottles <dbl>, plastic_bags <dbl>,
    ## #   wrappers <dbl>, sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>, source <chr>
